====== Religion as a component structure ======

Elliot Wallace, 24 February 2014, incorporating elements of earlier writing.

Second draft, 27 February 2014.

In religion, there is frequent overlap and sharing of common elements between various faiths, creating a diverse religious culture that is nevertheless interconnected. For example, Gnosticism is a group of belief systems sharing certain core tenets, particularly the focuses on the development of sophia (wisdom) to attain gnosis (knowledge) and on the rejection of the physical world in the endeavor to attain ascendance into the spiritual. It shares common themes and elements with many Christian and other belief systems. Syncretism is the sharing of discrete elements between belief systems. The texts we have studied in this unit are a perfect example of such a fusing of religious elements, sharing many commonalities both between the Gnostic and non-Gnostic gospels, and with the texts we have studied over this past semester and a half. 

While Gnosticism is a term applied to a range of diverse, in some ways incompatible belief systems (such as Sethianism, Gnostic Luciferianism, and Mandaeism), Gnostic belief systems retain the shared basis of Gnostic thinking, presenting one excellent example of the presence of distinct common elements shared between a variety of belief systems. A wide range of shared themes and symbolism are also visible in other religious contexts, such as mainstream modern Christian faiths, Daoism, Buddhism, and the Sumerian religion seen in Inanna. 

Another example of the diverse sharing of religious thought, the Dao De Jing uses symbolism extensively. Its symbolic elements contrast and pair together the concepts of presence, yang, and emptiness, yin. This was novel in its time and place, paralleling the duality in Sumerian culture between the equals Inanna and Ereshkigal. The Daoist philosophy of equivalent duality broke apart traditional dualities which viewed the two as mutually incompatible entities: presence immutably good, and emptiness a frightening threat to be subsumed and filled. This is also a concept that is explored in the Manichaean philosophical basis that influenced St Augustine's writing. The Daoist ideals of presence and emptiness form two necessary, fundamentally interdependent sides of the same coin. This contrast mirrors the contrasts between elements of Judaism and Theistic or Gnostic Luciferianism. The two religions have similar moral and ethical ideals and objectives, and are rooted in some of the same philosophical traditions, but use largely inverse imagery of deities. Judaism’s deity imagery is very immaterial: an intangible, unknowable God, yet a God with a direct, omnipotent influence over creation.

Luciferianism's inspiration of hope is the Morning Star (Lucifer — the Light Bearer — in the Christian tradition; Inanna in the Sumerian tradition; or some interpretations of Lilith). Although the Morning Star figure has radically different interpretations and significances to different cultures and belief systems (for example, the Sumerian tradition is centered around fertility and food, but the Gnostic tradition is centered around self-denial) the symbolic parallels of the figure within its various cultures have a commonality in its position as a source of hope and inspiration. The Morning Star is often seen as acting through the truth of sophia and the capacity of humans to achieve some spiritual enlightenment through the rejection of the physical world (harkening back, incidentally, to Daoism’s strength of the nothingness). This is a very concrete, physical deity in the Sumerian tradition, reflecting the Sumerian agricultural economy (yet not a deity necessarily given to “micromanaging”, to use a word the author Mary Doria Russell uses to refer to some interpretations of God). This contrast between the two schools of thought echoes the contrast in Daoism found in the presence-absence duality. 

In the non-canonical gospels we read in this unit, there were many shared themes with Gnostic writings; thus these gospels have become known as the Gnostic gospels. That does not necessarily indicate a shared Gnostic origin for them, but rather indicates that they share elements of the diverse Gnostic tradition. For example, the gospel of Judas is strongly Sethian (“The first is [S]eth, who is called Christ”, p. 6), while the gospel of Thomas is a more general Christian text with some common themes of Gnosticism (it may have played a role in the development of the general themes of the Gnostic tradition). 

In the Gospel of Mary, it is written “There is no sin, but it is you who make sin when you do the things that are like the nature of adultery, which is called sin.” This sentence emphasizes the Gnostic nature of the text, in its equating of sin with adultery providing a connection to the traditional Gnostic focus on the rejection of the physical in the interest of the finding of knowledge through wisdom. 

The parallels in name symbolism in religious traditions are very interesting. In the And the parallels between spiritual figures that cross over between various religious traditions. That is very noticeable in the Roman and Greek traditions, which have very significant parallel between them, with many individual gods corresponding between one and the other. But also between other religions such as Christianity and Sumerian tradition, the most obvious example being the parallel between Jesus and Inanna, both known as the Morning Star to their respective cultures. For example, in the Exsultet, the line “Flammas ejus lúcifer matutínus invéniat: Ille, inquam, lúcifer, qui nescit occásum: Christus Fílius tuus, qui, regréssus ab ínferis, humáno géneri serénus illúxit”… refers to Jesus as the Morning Star: “May this flame be found still burning by the Morning Star: the one Morning Star who never sets, Christ your Son, who coming back from death’s domain has shed his peaceful light on humanity”. (http://www.ccwatershed.org/exsultet/) Another example of name symbolism is found in the Jewish tradition's naming of the first humans: Cain's name symbolizes worldly things, material goods, and possessions; Abel's name symbolizes the immaterial, the ethereal, and the intangible, and Seth's name refers to the “appointed”, a concept later reflected in the Sethian equating of Christ to Seth. These symbolic meanings of these names have held a long-lasting and pervasive influence on the understanding and portrayal of these figures in religion and popular culture, even as far afield as in their characterizations in the anime Trinity Blood.

In Book 8, chapter 6 of //The City of God against the Pagans//, Augustine presents a summary of the Neoplatonic philosophical theory of existence that played such a role in defining the Gnostic tradition. The Neoplatonic theory argues that since God is unchanging, nothing that changes can be God, and thus God is immaterial. Since the complex, fragmented physical world perceived by the senses changes, it only exists within the context or framework of the simple, indivisible, immutable God. They argue that life is greater than matter, the body's appearance being a sense perception, while life's form is a perception of the intellect. They argue that aesthetic appreciation is a construct of the mind, thus implying the existence of something immaterial within the mind. Yet, since different minds will make different judgements of the same thing, the mind must be mutable: things which exist in a range of degrees must be mutable, while the origin reality is absolute, without degrees, and thus immutable. The separation of sense perception from the true nature is reflected in Kant's later conception of the noumenon, or absolute truth, of a thing, as distinct from the sense perception of that thing.

These are a few examples of the many interesting facets of the sharing of ideas between a diverse array of religions, as well as of the role name symbolism can play in the context of religious thought. 