====== Project 4 Preliminary ======

20 March 2014

In the process of developing the fourth project for this course, I have run across a number of significant challenges that merit discussion in the context of this preliminary assessment. Perhaps most notably, I have endeavored to understand the rules and patterns that make up the Java programming language, yet I still find the language quite a challenge. Due to my inability to express myself using this language, my strategy for developing this fourth project has been to sketch out my mathematics and the object structures and relationships of the project in PHP pseudocode, as that is the language most familiar to me. This division of the processes involved in the implementation of the project has allowed me to do most of the non-Java-specific programming for the project with what was for me a most welcome rapidity and astounding level of efficiency, completing a substantial chunk of the project in only a few short hours. Division of procedures truly seems to be an effective strategy for getting programming done faster; this also reduces my frustration and makes me feel more able to effectively complete the coursework in the limited time available. Once I complete this phase of the development, and know that my (rather unsophisticated) line rasterization algorithm works correctly, I can proceed to reimplement these ideas using Java. In that process, I will have a clearer sense of what I am attempting to accomplish in the project — a separation of the concerns of design and implementation. Thus, I will be able to concentrate my energies on the technicalities of expressing myself in Java, without worrying about what I am actually trying to express (since I will already have completed that). This ability to focus on that part of the problem will allow me to complete it more efficiently than alternating between figuring out what I'm trying to program and actually writing the Java code (a process that continually left me either unable to remember what I was trying to get the program to do or the specifics and details of how the Java language enables me to express the program).

I face a number of challenges in working with the Java language. The restrictions on what code can go where, the other aspects of the design philosophy, and the unfamiliar syntax all trip me up frequently (in roughly that order), since I have not worked with the language very much and it is very different from others I have used. One way in which Java differs significantly from languages that I am more familiar with is in that it enforces object-oriented design: I must include code inside of a class, rather than placing it directly within the file. I am used to a class (or multiple classes) being a construct placed inside of a script that is executed from start to end; in Java each class is given its own file and things outside of a class will not be executed.

Another challenge in the implementation of Project 4 for me has been my unfamiliarity with the mathematics used in both projects 2 and 4. They expect a much more thorough understanding of mathematics than I have, including concepts such as polar coordinates and the mathematics of lines; these are new ideas for me and have been both challenging and interesting.

I plan to continue to work with Prof. Latour in his office hours next week. I hope that doing so will enable me to successfully complete this project despite the difficulties I have encountered in my attempts to do so so far.