====== #4. Gnosticism, syncretism, and the building blocks of faith  ======

Gnosticism is a group of belief systems sharing certain core tenets, particularly the focuses on the development of sophia (wisdom) to attain gnosis (knowledge) and on the rejection of the physical world in the endeavor to attain ascendance into the spiritual. It shares common themes and elements with many Christian and other belief systems. Syncretism is the sharing of discrete elements between belief systems. The texts we have studied in this unit are a perfect example of such a fusing of religious elements, sharing many commonalities both between the Gnostic and non-Gnostic gospels, and with the texts we have studied over this past semester and a half.

While Gnosticism is a term applied to a range of diverse, in some ways incompatible belief systems (such as Sethianism, Gnostic Luciferianism, and Mandaeism), Gnostic belief systems retain the shared basis of Gnostic thinking, presenting one excellent example of the presence of distinct common elements shared between a variety of belief systems. A wide range of shared themes and symbolism are also visible in other religious contexts, such as mainstream modern Christian faiths, Daoism, Buddhism, and the Sumerian religion seen in //Inanna//.

In the non-canonical gospels we read in this unit, there were many shared themes with Gnostic writings; thus these gospels have become known as the Gnostic gospels. That does not necessarily indicate a shared Gnostic origin for them, but rather indicates that they share elements of the diverse Gnostic tradition. For example, the gospel of Judas is strongly Sethian ("The first is [S]eth, who is called Christ", p. 6), while the gospel of Thomas is a more general Christian text with some common themes of Gnosticism (it may have played a role in the development of the general themes of the Gnostic tradition).

The parallels in name symbolism in religious traditions are very interesting. In the And the parallels between spiritual figures that cross over between various religious traditions. That is very noticeable in the Roman and Greek traditions, which have very significant parallel between them, with many individual gods corresponding between one and the other. But also between other religions such as Christianity and Sumerian tradition, the most obvious example being the parallel between Jesus and Inanna, both known as the Morning Star to their respective cultures. For example, in the Exsultet, the line "Flammas ejus lúcifer matutínus invéniat: Ille, inquam, lúcifer, qui nescit occásum: Christus Fílius tuus, qui, regréssus ab ínferis, humáno géneri serénus illúxit"… refers to Jesus as the Morning Star: "May this flame be found still burning by the Morning Star: the one Morning Star who never sets, Christ your Son, who coming back from death’s domain has shed his peaceful light on humanity". (http://www.ccwatershed.org/exsultet/)

These are a few examples of the many interesting facets of the sharing of ideas between a diverse array of religions, as well as of the role name symbolism can play in the context of religious thought.