Draft — Vitruvius Blog Post, version 2, 27 January 2014

“Architecture, Feng Shui, Global Truths, and Contradiction”

In  Vitruvius' //The Ten Books On Architecture//, Vitruvius describes a much broader study than just the design of buildings. His architecture includes many diverse fields, such as weapon design and the building of musical instruments. In the book, he discusses many things in a manner that reminds me of feng shui, as well as other influential philosophies and principles. The way he looks at the world and analyzes its components and the relationships between them plays a major role in this comparison. While the secondary conclusions that he draws from his fundamental conclusions based on his observations and studies frequently diverge from those of feng shui, his overall methodology and way of thinking was strikingly similar. From these parallels, I conclude that while there are some fundamental universal truths and principles that can be concluded from the critical observation and analysis of the natural world, there are also many secondary conclusions that have been drawn throughout history that conflict with one another. This leads to many significant dissimilarities and conflicts in the actual application of the principles thus established.

In the first book on architecture, there was one particularly striking example of the parallels between Vitruvius' architectural philosophy and both feng shui and thermodynamics. At the bottom of page 47 and the top of page 48, Vitruvius writes "there were once fires spreading over the fields" … "moisture has been extracted from the tufa and earth, by the force of fire". Vitruvius' writing here is indicative of a mindset centered around the relationships between certain classes of matter; in feng shui this is paralleled by the relationships between and structures of the elements and their interactions. Later on page 48, he writes again "when different and unlike things have been subjected to the action of fire" … "while in a warm, dry state, they are suddenly saturated with water, there is an effervescence of the heat latent in the bodies of them all, and this makes them firmly unite and quickly assume the property of one solid mass". This sentence both parallels feng shui and thermodynamics: the way he presents and assesses the interactions of heat and matter are similar to the feng shui tradition, and the idea of thermal capacity of matter is an element of the development of modern thermodynamics.

On page 58, at the beginning of chapter 9, Vitruvius writes "Timber should be felled between early Autumn and the time when Favonius begins to blow. For in Spring all trees become pregnant, and they are employing their natural vigor in the production of leaves"… As page 48 in book 1 parallels the principles of both feng shui and thermodynamics, so does this sentence parallel the principles of feng shui and agricultural theory. Vitruvius' use of the seasons to assess and dictate forestry practices is reflective of the way western agricultural theory uses the seasons to the advantage of the settled western agricultural culture, allowing for the greatest productivity and fruitfulness through growing crops at times when the intersection of the seasons and the natural predispositions of the targeted crops is positioned for the greatest yield, thus also allowing both additional leisure time for recreation, and giving the ground time to replenish its nutrients. This practice also parallels feng shui's focus on the relationships between the seasons and the optimal capacities of each for the greatest prosperity and effectiveness in given objectives and endeavors.

The eighth book discusses water, and its types, properties, and uses. It is a very technical and procedural book compared to the first and second, reading more like a how-to book or a manual than the conversational, philosophical tone of the first and second. As a result of the different tone and intention of this eighth book from the first two, there are fewer clear examples of the parallels between Vitruvius' philosophy and feng shui. This book is more a product of the underlying philosophies laid out in the first two, a text-book of sorts for his manner of study, the principles of which were expressed before. However, there are still a few occasions when the underlying similarity between Vitruvius' philosophy and feng shui shows through in this book. For example, on page 241, he writes that the "great variety in different things is a distribution due to nature, for even the human body, which consists in part of the earthy, contains many kinds of juices, such as blood, milk, sweat, urine, and tears"…. The concept of the diverse fluid elements of the body remained throughout later times in the form of the philosophy of the four humors of the body: blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy, each associated with a physical element and a season, and all needing to be balanced properly for the correct functioning of the body. This influential method of assessment of the workings of humans is an interesting parallel to feng shui in the principle that maintaining the correct balance between seasons and their corresponding elements is critical to the health and proper functioning of the human body; this theory is nearly a direct parallel between western thought and the principles of feng shui.

Despite the relative scarcity of examples found in book 8, due to its differing tone and objectives, the many examples from Vitruvius's //The Ten Books On Architecture// show a startling similarity between Vitruvius' natural philosophy of the wide-ranging study of architecture and the underlying concepts, principles, and ways of thinking found in the feng shui tradition, as well as in other principles and philosophies. From these striking parallels and commonalities, I conclude that there are certain general truths which are found upon the examination of the physical nature and composition of the world. At the same time, there are definite contradictions between them; the ultimate conclusions drawn from these observed principles tend to differ in their natures and implementations. Consequently, it seems that many such systems must be observed with a fair helping of questioning, to ensure that the most accurate conclusions are drawn from such systems of thought.